Title: A Sense of Scale (in Dollars and Cents)
Date: 2011-04-07 21:42:00
Tags: large numbers, scott bakula, politics
Category: old
Slug: a-sense-of-scale-in-dollars-and-cents-
Author: Corky

I hate politics, but for some reason I obsessively read about it. &nbsp;I don't know why I do this, but I assume it's the same reason people slow down for car wrecks and pay to see the geek [1]. &nbsp;Anyway, the big thing in political news now is that if Congress can't pass a budget [2] by the end of the day Friday, the government will shut down. <br /><br />Shutting down the government means that 800,000 federal employees will go without pay [3], lots of services will be put on hold and you won't be able to go to the Smithsonian or the Grand Canyon. &nbsp;So it's kind of a big deal. &nbsp;Since the ramifications of a government shutdown are so serious, there must be some really important disagreements holding it up, right? &nbsp;Right?<br /><br />A quick search (for example, <a href="http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/apr/07/us-congress-staff-government-shutdown">here</a>), shows that the big hold-up in passing the budget comes over a disagreement on how much money should be cut from the budget. &nbsp;Republicans want to cut $40 billion dollars and Democrats are willing to cut $34.5 billion dollars. <br /><br />So the hold-up is over $5.5 billion. &nbsp;Let's consider how utterly and stupidly insignificant this is.<br /><a name='more'></a><br />We shall take as our inspiration Alemi's&nbsp;<a href="http://thevirtuosi.blogspot.com/2010/12/law-and-large-numbers.html">post</a>&nbsp;a while back offering several ways to help visualize the large and scary sounding numbers thrown around in government budgets.<br /><br />The first thing we'd like to do is find out what fraction this $5.5 billion discrepancy is compared to the total budget. &nbsp;Alemi cites the total budget of the U.S. government in the 2010 fiscal year to be $3.55 trillion. &nbsp;Hot dog! &nbsp;So we see that:<br /><br />\[ \frac{\mbox{Disputed Difference}}{\mbox{Total Budget}} = \frac{\$5.5 \times 10^9}{\$3.55 \times 10^{12}} = 0.0015 \]<br /><br />So the disputed part amounts to 0.15% of the total budget or one and half parts in a thousand. &nbsp;Let's compare this to some things for which we have a better sense of scale. <br /><br />Let's pretend we are looking to buy a car. &nbsp;We need it to get to work and, you know, get stuff done. &nbsp;If our car costs $10,000 dollars then 0.15% of our total costs will be<br /><br />\[ \mbox{\$10,000} \times 0.0015 = \$15 \]<br /><br />So the current budget situation is like arguing for 6 months over a $15 charge on your $10,000 car. &nbsp;Sounds reasonable!<br /><br />Now let's switch gears and consider a timescale. &nbsp;Let's consider a 40 hour work week. &nbsp;What's 0.15% of 40 hours? &nbsp;This comes to<br /><br />\[ 40 \mbox{ hr} \times 0.0015 = 0.06 \mbox{ hr} \]<br /><br />or, if you prefer,<br /><br />\[ 0.06 \mbox{ hr} \times \frac{60 \mbox{ min}}{1 \mbox{ hr}} = 3.6 \mbox{ minutes} \] <br /><br />So the current budget problem is like arguing for six months over about three and a half extra minutes to your work week.<br /><br />Now let's consider a length scale. &nbsp;Consider the US $1 bill. &nbsp;According to <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_one-dollar_bill#Small_size_notes">Wikipedia</a>, the dollar bill is 6.14 inches long, 2.61 inches wide and 0.0043 inches thick. &nbsp;That means that the ratio of the thickness to the width of a dollar bill is<br /><br />\[ \frac{\mbox{Thickness}}{\mbox{Width}} = \frac{0.0043 \mbox{ inches}}{2.61 \mbox{ inches}} = 0.0016 \]<br /><br />or slightly <i>more</i>&nbsp;than the disputed fraction of the budget. &nbsp;Hooray!<br /><br />"That's all well and nice," you say, lowering your voice and leaning over in a way that makes me uncomfortable, "but who is to&nbsp;<i>blame</i>?"<br /><br />That's a great question! &nbsp;My answer will take the form of an experiment. <br /><br />First, get a coin. &nbsp;Got it? &nbsp;Great. &nbsp;Now if you're Republican, let heads be "The Republicans" and tails be "The Democrats." &nbsp;If you're a Democrat, let heads be "The Democrats" and tails be "The Republicans." &nbsp;If you are neither, then randomly assign a party to heads and allow the other to be tails.<br /><br />Ready?<br /><br /><br />The coin is to blame.<br /><br /><br /><br /><br />[1] &nbsp;I use this in its original meaning. &nbsp;That is, the guy whose job it was to do horribly gross things at a carnival for money, not the guy whose main form of social interaction is debating scenes in Star Wars on internet forums. &nbsp;A more up-to-date comparison would have been to say "for the same reason that people watch <i>Jersey Shore</i>."<br /><br />[2] &nbsp;That is, the budget for the 2011 fiscal year, which started on October 1st 2010. <br /><br />[3] &nbsp;Don't worry, all members of Congress would be exempt from this and would still pick up paychecks!
