Title: Problem of the Week #2: Solution
Date: 2010-11-23 17:46:00
Tags: problem of the week
Category: old
Slug: problem-of-the-week-2-solution
Author: Holmes

Thanks to all who sent in solutions! We are very happy with the vast number of responses, and we will put up a leader board shortly!<br /><br /><span style="font-weight: bold;">Solution</span><br /><br /><a name='more'></a><br /><br />Let <span style="font-style: italic;">A</span> be the fraction of the rubber band that the ant has traversed.<br /><br />\[A\left(t\right)=\frac{x\left(t\right)}{L+vt}.\]<br /><br />The  ant's velocity relative to any point along the rubber band is equal to  the length of the rubber band times the first time derivative of <span style="font-style: italic;">A</span>:<br /><br />\[u=\left(L+vt\right)\frac{dA}{dt}=\left(L+vt\right)\left[\frac{\dot{x}}{L+vt}-\frac{vx}{\left(L+vt\right)^{2}}\right]=\dot{x}-\frac{vx}{L+vt}.\]<br /><br />This gives us an inseparable, first-order differential equation for <span style="font-style: italic;">x</span>(<span style="font-style: italic;">t</span>). The general differential equation of this type,<br /><br />\[\dot{x}+p\left(t\right)x=q\left(t\right),\]<br /><br />has the general solution<br /><br />\[x\left(t\right)=e^{-\int_{0}^{t} p\left(t\right)dt}\int_{0}^{t} q\left(t\right)e^{\int_{0}^{t} p\left(t\right)dt}dt.\]<br /><br />In our case,<br /><br />\[p\left(t\right)=-\frac{v}{L+vt},\quad q\left(t\right)=u.\]<br /><br />Therefore,<br /><br />\[x\left(t\right)&amp;=&amp;e^{\int\frac{v}{L+vt}dt}\int ue^{-\int\frac{v}{L+vt}dt}dt=\frac{u}{v}\left(L+vt\right)\ln\left(1+\frac{vt}{L}\right).\]<br /><br />When the ant has reached the other side, <span style="font-style: italic;">x</span>(<span style="font-style: italic;">t</span>) = <span style="font-style: italic;">L</span> + <span style="font-style: italic;">vt</span>, so<br /><br />\[x\left(t\right)=L+vt=\frac{u}{v}\left(L+vt\right)\ln\left(1+\frac{vt}{L}\right).\]<br /><br />Solving for t, we get<br /><br />\[t=\frac{L}{v}\left(e^{v/u}-1\right).\]<br /><br />So the ant always makes it to the other side (unless <span style="font-style: italic;">u</span> = 0)! In the limit as <span style="font-style: italic;">v</span> -&gt; 0, we get<br /><br />\[t\approx\frac{L}{u},\]<br /><br />which is exactly what we would expect.<br /><br />We  can show that the ant will reach the other side without doing any  calculations. As the ant moves across the rubber band, the velocity of  the point on the rubber band that the ant is currently walking on  increases from 0 to <span style="font-style: italic;">v</span>.  Therefore, the ant is accelerating. Since the other end of the rubber  band is moving at a constant velocity, the accelerating ant will always  eventually catch up to the far end.<br /><br />Another way to see this is  that since the ant is accelerating, if it makes it halfway, it will make  it all the way to the other side; if it makes it one-quarter of the  way, it will make it halfway, and so on. We know that since the ant is  traveling at some nonzero velocity, it must make it some nonzero  fraction of the way to the other side. Therefore, it must make it twice  that far, and so on, all the way to the other side. Thanks to Frank for pointing this out!
