Title: Solar Sails Addendum I
Date: 2010-05-16 23:28:00
Tags: 
Category: old
Slug: solar-sails-addendum-i
Author: Corky

As requested, below is an explicit evaluation of the silly looking integral in <a href="http://thevirtuosi.blogspot.com/2010/05/solar-sails-i.html">Solar Sails I</a>. &nbsp;If you just want some hints to do the integral, see <a href="http://thevirtuosi.blogspot.com/2010/05/solar-sails-addendum-ii.html">Solar Sails Addendum II</a>.<br /><br /><a name='more'></a><br /><br /><br />Here we present a step-by-step solution of the differential equation:<br /><br />\[ \frac{dr}{dt} = \left[ \frac{2\alpha}{m} \left( \frac{1}{r_0} - \frac{1}{r} \right)\right]^{1/2} \]<br /><br />This is just a separable equation, so we rearrange to get an integral equation:<br /><br />\[ \int_{r_0}^{r_f} \frac{dr}{\left[ \frac{2\alpha}{m} \left( \frac{1}{r_0} - \frac{1}{r} \right)\right]^{1/2}} =\int_{0}^{t}dt\]<br /><br />We see that the right hand side here will just evaluate to t. &nbsp;Let's rearrange the left hand side to get the integration variable to be dimensionless. This is important because it allows the integral to just be a number, with all the unit-dependent terms pulled outside. &nbsp;So we have<br /><br />\[ \int_{r_0}^{r_f} \frac{dr}{\left[ \frac{2\alpha}{mr_0} \left( 1 - \frac{r_0}{r} \right)\right]^{1/2}} =t\]<br /><br />\noindent Now we can do a change of variables to get the dimensionless variable u = r/r0. &nbsp;This is just giving us our distance in terms of our initial distance. &nbsp;In the problem I took r_0 to be 1 AU. &nbsp;So u just gives our distance now in terms of AU:<br /><br />\[ \int_{1}^{u_f} \frac{du}{\left[ \frac{2\alpha}{m{r_0}^3} \left( 1 - \frac{1}{u} \right)\right]^{1/2}} =t\]<br /><br /><br />So lets set<br /><br />\[ k = (m{r_0}^3}/{2 \alpha)^{1/2} ,\]<br /><br />which just gives<br /><br />\[ k\int_{1}^{u_f} \frac{du}{\left[ \left( 1 - \frac{1}{u} \right)\right]^{1/2}} =t\]<br /><br />Now we are ready to get started! &nbsp;Typically, when I see something with a square root in the denominator that's giving me trouble, I just blindly try trig substitutions. &nbsp;Let's try u = [csc(x)]^2, so 1/u &nbsp;= [sin(x)]^2 and du = -(csc x)^2 * cot x, and<br /><br />\[ \int_{1}^{u_f} \frac{du}{\left[ \left( 1 - \frac{1}{u} \right)\right]^{1/2}} =\int_{x_0}^{x_f} \frac{-2\csc^2x \cot x dx}{\left(1-\sin^2x \right)^{1/2}} = \int_{x_0}^{x_f} -2\csc^3x dx ,\]<br /><br />where x_0 = pi/2 and x_f = arcsin u_f . &nbsp;The last equality above just comes from simplifying the trig expressions. &nbsp;So now how do we solve this "easier" problem? &nbsp;As a wise man once said, "When in doubt, integrate by parts." &nbsp;So let's try that. &nbsp;Expanding out a bit we see that:<br /><br />\[ -\int_{x_0}^{x_f} \csc^3x dx = \int_{x_0}^{x_f}\csc x \left(-\csc^2x \right)dx \]<br /><br />Remembering that integration by parts goes like<br /><br />\[ \int u dv = uv - \int v du \]<br /><br />we can set u = csc x and v = \cot x$ to get<br /><br />\[ \int_{x_0}^{x_f}\csc x \left(-\csc^2x \right)dx = \csc x \cot x \Big |_{x_0}^{x_f} - \int_{x_0}^{x_f} \cot x \left(-\csc x \cot x \right) dx \]<br /><br />which is just<br /><br />\[ -\int_{x_0}^{x_f}\csc^3x dx = \csc x \cot x \Big |_{x_0}^{x_f} + \int_{x_0}^{x_f} \cot^2 x \csc x dx \]<br /><br />Remembering that<br /><br />\[ \cot^2 x = \csc^2 x -1 ,\]<br /><br />we have<br /><br />\[ -\int_{x_0}^{x_f}\csc^3x dx = \csc x \cot x \Big |_{x_0}^{x_f} + \int_{x_0}^{x_f} \left(\csc^2 x - 1 \right) \csc x dx \]<br /><br />which we can expand to<br /><br />\[ -\int_{x_0}^{x_f}\csc^3x dx = \csc x \cot x \Big |_{x_0}^{x_f} - \int_{x_0}^{x_f} \csc x dx + \int_{x_0}^{x_f} \csc^3 x dx\]<br /><br />But this is just what we want! &nbsp;Rearranging we now have that<br /><br />\[ -2\int_{x_0}^{x_f}\csc^3x dx = \csc x \cot x \Big |_{x_0}^{x_f} - \int_{x_0}^{x_f} \csc x dx\]<br /><br />Remembering that the integral for csc is<br /><br />\[ \int \csc x dx =-\ln | \csc x + \cot x| + C \]<br /><br />and evaluating our limits we have that<br /><br />\[ -2\int_{x_0}^{x_f}\csc^3x dx = \csc x_f \cot x_f - \csc x_0 \cot x_0 +\ln \left( \frac{| \csc x_f + \cot x_f|}{| \csc x_0 + \cot x_0|} \right) \]<br /><br />Now we just need to evaluate at x_0 = pi/2 and x_f = arcsin u_f. &nbsp;We can draw a right triangle with far angle x_f, hypoteneuse of length sqrt{u}, and legs of length 1 and sqrt{u-1} to see that csc x_f = sqrt{u} and cot x_f = sqrt{u-1}, so<br /><br /><br />\[ -2\int_{x_0}^{x_f}\csc^3x dx = \sqrt{u}\sqrt{u-1} + \ln{ | \sqrt{u} + \sqrt{u-1}|} \]<br /><br />And this is what we have sought from the beginning. &nbsp;Using the last two equations on the first page we see that<br /><br /><br />\[ t = k\int_{1}^{u_f} \frac{du}{\left[ \left( 1 - \frac{1}{u} \right)\right]^{1/2}} = k\left[-2\int_{x_0}^{x_f}\csc^3x dx \right] = k \left[\sqrt{u}\sqrt{u-1} + \ln{ | \sqrt{u} + \sqrt{u-1}|} \right] \]<br /><br />Plugging back in our value of k, we have<br /><br />\[ t = \left(\frac{m{r_0}^3}{2\alpha} \right)^{1/2}\left[\sqrt{u}\sqrt{u-1} + \ln{ | \sqrt{u} + \sqrt{u-1}|} \right] \]<br /><br />Simplifying a bit and dropping the absolute value bars since u will always be bigger than u-1, we have our final answer:<br /><br />\[ t = \left(\frac{m{r_0}^3}{2\alpha} \right)^{1/2}\left[\sqrt{u(u-1)} + \ln{ \left( \sqrt{u} + \sqrt{u-1}\right)} \right] \]<br /><br />where u = r / r_0 is our non-dimensional distance measurement. &nbsp;And this is (up to some rearranging) exactly what we get in the initial post. <br /><div><br /></div>
