Title: Solar Sails Addendum II
Date: 2010-05-16 23:27:00
Tags: 
Category: old
Slug: solar-sails-addendum-ii
Author: Corky

This is the schematic version, if you just wanted hints. &nbsp;The full solution is given in <a href="http://thevirtuosi.blogspot.com/2010/05/solar-sails-addendum-i.html">Solar Sails Addendum I</a>.<br /><br /><a name='more'></a>Here we present a schematic solution of the differential equation:<br /><br />\[ \frac{dr}{dt} = \left[ \frac{2\alpha}{m} \left( \frac{1}{r_0} - \frac{1}{r} \right)\right]^{1/2} \]<br /><br />This is just a separable equation, so we rearrange to get an integral equation:<br /><br />\[ \int_{r_0}^{r_f} \frac{dr}{\left[ \frac{2\alpha}{m} \left( \frac{1}{r_0} - \frac{1}{r} \right)\right]^{1/2}} = \int_{0}^{t}dt\]<br /><br />From here it's nice to non-dimensionalize, so our integration variable is just a number (with no units attached). &nbsp;This allows us to get the integral into a form like<br /><br />\[ k\int_{1}^{u_f} \frac{du}{\left[ \left( 1 - \frac{1}{u} \right)\right]^{1/2}} = t\]<br /><br />for appropriate values of k and u. Now we are ready to get started! &nbsp;Typically, when I see something with a square root in the denominator that's giving me trouble, I just blindly try trig substitutions. &nbsp;After an appropriate trig substitution, we get something of the form<br /><br />\[ \int_{1}^{u_f} \frac{du}{\left[ \left( 1 - \frac{1}{u} \right)\right]^{1/2}} = \int_{x_0}^{x_f} -2\csc^3x dx\],<br /><br />So now how do we solve this "easier" problem? &nbsp;As a wise man once said, "When in doubt, integrate by parts." &nbsp;So let's try that.<br /><br />\[ \left[ \mbox{HINT:} -\int_{x_0}^{x_f} \csc^3x dx = \int_{x_0}^{x_f}\csc x \left(-\csc^2x \right)dx \right]\]<br /><br />Remembering that integration by parts goes like<br /><br />\[ \int u dv = uv - \int v du \]<br /><br />we can pick appropriate values of u and v to get something nice, which eventually leads to<br /><br />\[ -\int_{x_0}^{x_f}\csc^3x dx = \csc x \cot x \Big |_{x_0}^{x_f} - \int_{x_0}^{x_f} \csc x dx + \int_{x_0}^{x_f} \csc^3 x dx\]<br /><br />But this is just what we want! &nbsp;Rearranging we now have that<br /><br />\[ -2\int_{x_0}^{x_f}\csc^3x dx = \csc x \cot x \Big |_{x_0}^{x_f} - \int_{x_0}^{x_f} \csc x dx\]<br /><br />Evaluating our integrals, we see that<br /><br />\[ -2\int_{x_0}^{x_f}\csc^3x dx = \sqrt{u}\sqrt{u-1} + \ln{ | \sqrt{u} + \sqrt{u-1}|} \]<br /><br />And this is what we have sought from the beginning. &nbsp;Plugging back in to our earlier equations and rearranging gives<br /><br /><br />\[ t = \left(\frac{m{r_0}^3}{2\alpha} \right)^{1/2}\left[\sqrt{u(u-1)} + \ln{\left( \sqrt{u} + \sqrt{u-1}\right)} \right] \]<br /><br />where u = r / r_0 is our non-dimensional distance measurement. &nbsp;And this is (up to some algebra) exactly what we get in the initial post. <br /><br /><div><br /></div>
