Title: Through the Looking Glass
Date: 2010-06-09 13:04:00
Tags: 
Category: old
Slug: through-the-looking-glass
Author: Alemi

Now that the semester is over, I'd like to look back and reflect on my first year teaching.  <br /><br />I served as a TA both semesters this year.  First semester I taught Electricity and Magnetism plus Thermodynamics for engineers, with two recitation sections twice a week, and a lab section about once every other week.  Second semester I taught Electricity and Magnetism, but this time the honors class designed primarily for prospective physics and applied physics majors.<br /><br /><br />First a little background so that you may interpret my comments how you please.  I went to public high school, my freshman year in Wisconsin, and the rest in Orlando, Florida.  I obtained my Bachelors of Science in physics from Caltech. <br /><br /><h3>Some Problems </h3><br />While teaching, I noticed some problems.  <br /><ul><li> Too many digits in calculations.</li><li> A lack of common sense applied to numbers. </li><li> A disrespect for units. </li><li> A lack of confidence. </li><li> A distrust of approximation </li><li> False preconceptions of what physics is. </li></ul><br /><br /><br /><br />------------------<br />general thoughts<br />Students don't know what physics is.  Come in with false expectations<br />Books don't help.  Physics is not accounting.<br /><br />Sour points.<br />Dimensional analysis.  Common sense numbers.  Willingness to be wrong.  Most often I wouldn't do anything for them.   They do not ask questions.  W=Fd.  Sig Figs.<br /><br />Suggestions:<br />Be explicit about assumptions, like Feynman.  Give some real world numbers to ground ideas of magnitude.  Challenge students.  Be less helpful.  <br /><br />Things I did.<br />Power line transmission problem.  Balloons from string problem.  Little motor problem.  <br /><br />Difference between engineering physics and honors.  Difference between standard textbook and purcell.  Find a good purcell problem.
