<--
.. title: Physics Challenge II:  Marty McPhysics
.. date: 2011-09-05 14:16:00
.. tags: physics challenge, time travel, great scott
.. category: old
.. slug: physics-challenge-ii-marty-mcphysics
.. author: Corky
-->


  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  [![image](http://1.bp.blogspot.com/-cuT_VPl_Yd8/TmQbG_7B5DI/AAAAAAAAAOs/DA9sTNI-nGk/s1600/greatscott.jpg)](http://1.bp.blogspot.com/-cuT_VPl_Yd8/TmQbG_7B5DI/AAAAAAAAAOs/DA9sTNI-nGk/s1600/greatscott.jpg)
  Doc Brown didn't have a time-travel backup plan.
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In light of the incredible success of our last Physics Challenge Problem
(we received *several* responses), we here at the Virtuosi have decided
to reinstate what was nominally a "monthly" contest. In addition to a
brand-spankin'-new problem (with "prizes", see [1]), we have also tried
to make a nice collaborative environment for discussing interesting
physics problems and posting your own solutions. So I will discuss our
[new
problem](http://pages.physics.cornell.edu/~aalemi/challenge/timemachine.php)
and then I'll throw it over to Alemi to discuss the goal of our new
Physics Challenge webpage. Our last challenge problem
([here](http://pages.physics.cornell.edu/~aalemi/challenge/archive.php),
with winning solutions) was deemed a bit "unrealistic" by many because
it assumes that you were shipwrecked on a desert island *with a CRC
handbook!* What a ridiculous situation! Fear not, dear readers, we have
heard your complaints and have adjusted accordingly. Our new problem
relies on a far less ridiculous assumption. Assume you have created a
time machine out of a DeLorean [2]. You are sure it will send you back
in time and, causality-be-damned, you are ready to give it a test drive.
But you are less confident in the machine's ability to take you exactly
*when* you want. Additionally, the positive tachyonic chrono-coupler is
a bit finicky - meaning, of course, that there is a non-negligible
chance that once you go back in time, you may never be able to come
*Back to the Present*. Thus, there is a chance that your time machine
will have worked but no one will ever know! As an unabashed narcissist,
you find this totally unacceptable! But first and foremost, you are a
scientist. As a scientist, your challenge is to design a strategy that
would allow you to convince your present-day scientific peers that you
did travel back in the time even if you are stuck in the past. What
could you build/make/leave in the past that would be most likely to
convince modern scientists that it *had* to be from a time-traveler and
not just some hoaxer? How long would your strategy be effective? Would
it work if you were stuck ten thousand years in the past? What about a
million years in the past? What about 100 million? Though this is an
inherently silly problem, we feel that the idea behind it is a very
interesting one. What could one motivated person do/build/make that
would survive a long time into the future? Also, the winning solution
will be submitted as a policy White Paper for all future time-travelers.
So that's the new problem. You can find the "official" posting
[here](http://pages.physics.cornell.edu/~aalemi/challenge/timemachine.php).
I now cede the floor and my remaining time to the gentleman from
Wisconsin.

#### A sense of community...

So, we've had this blog going for a while now, and we get a decent
number of comments on our posts, but felt as though something has been
lacking. A certain sense of community. Over the past year, we've done
some neat things here, and now it's your turn. Step right up, because
we've just launched a google groups:
[TheVirtuosi](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/thevirtuosi) where
we hope people from all corners of the globe will gather to discuss
their kooky physics projects. Have you recently explored the physics of
cats? Launch a discussion. Do you have an idea but need some help
investigating it? Create a discussion and query us and all of our
fantastic readers. Have an idea for a blog post you want to see? Let us
know. Want to take a stab at solving one of the newly minted [Physics
Challenge](http://bit.ly/physicschallenge) problems in public? Go for
it! I know the site is sparse now, but we'd really like to build a
little bit of a community here, so please, post away. You all have
already bookmarked it I'm sure, but a permanent link has been added to
the top of the sidebar as well. That is all. [1] These "prizes" will no
longer be as exciting as the CRC from last time, for several reasons.
First of all, we are all poor grad students and have no money. Secondly,
the winners from last time lived as far away from us as physically
possible and it's expensive to ship heavy things. So what can you expect
to win? Well, you could win a "certificate of accomplishment" which
would just be drawn in crayon by one of this. But it will be made with
love! Or you could win a floppy disk with a recording of my very own
version of the Jurassic Park theme. The surprise is part of the fun (I'm
told). [2] Quoth the most famous chrononaut of our time, Dr. Emmett
Brown: "The way I see it, if you're gonna build a time machine into a
car, why not do it with some style?"
