Title: A Sense of Scale (in Dollars and Cents)
Date: 2011-04-07 21:42:00
Tags: large numbers, scott bakula, politics
Category: old
Slug: a-sense-of-scale-in-dollars-and-cents-
Author: Corky


I hate politics, but for some reason I obsessively read about it. I
don't know why I do this, but I assume it's the same reason people slow
down for car wrecks and pay to see the geek [1]. Anyway, the big thing
in political news now is that if Congress can't pass a budget [2] by the
end of the day Friday, the government will shut down. Shutting down the
government means that 800,000 federal employees will go without pay [3],
lots of services will be put on hold and you won't be able to go to the
Smithsonian or the Grand Canyon. So it's kind of a big deal. Since the
ramifications of a government shutdown are so serious, there must be
some really important disagreements holding it up, right? Right? A quick
search (for example,
[here](http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/apr/07/us-congress-staff-government-shutdown)),
shows that the big hold-up in passing the budget comes over a
disagreement on how much money should be cut from the budget.
Republicans want to cut $40 billion dollars and Democrats are willing to
cut $34.5 billion dollars. So the hold-up is over $5.5 billion. Let's
consider how utterly and stupidly insignificant this is. We shall take
as our inspiration Alemi's
[post](http://thevirtuosi.blogspot.com/2010/12/law-and-large-numbers.html)
a while back offering several ways to help visualize the large and scary
sounding numbers thrown around in government budgets. The first thing
we'd like to do is find out what fraction this $5.5 billion discrepancy
is compared to the total budget. Alemi cites the total budget of the
U.S. government in the 2010 fiscal year to be $3.55 trillion. Hot dog!
So we see that: $$ \\frac{\\mbox{Disputed Difference}}{\\mbox{Total
Budget}} = \\frac{\\$5.5 \\times 10\^9}{\\$3.55 \\times 10\^{12}} =
0.0015 $$ So the disputed part amounts to 0.15% of the total budget or
one and half parts in a thousand. Let's compare this to some things for
which we have a better sense of scale. Let's pretend we are looking to
buy a car. We need it to get to work and, you know, get stuff done. If
our car costs $10,000 dollars then 0.15% of our total costs will be $$
\\mbox{\\$10,000} \\times 0.0015 = \\$15 $$ So the current budget
situation is like arguing for 6 months over a $15 charge on your $10,000
car. Sounds reasonable! Now let's switch gears and consider a timescale.
Let's consider a 40 hour work week. What's 0.15% of 40 hours? This comes
to $$ 40 \\mbox{ hr} \\times 0.0015 = 0.06 \\mbox{ hr} $$ or, if you
prefer, $$ 0.06 \\mbox{ hr} \\times \\frac{60 \\mbox{ min}}{1 \\mbox{
hr}} = 3.6 \\mbox{ minutes} $$ So the current budget problem is like
arguing for six months over about three and a half extra minutes to your
work week. Now let's consider a length scale. Consider the US $1 bill.
According to
[Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_one-dollar_bill#Small_size_notes),
the dollar bill is 6.14 inches long, 2.61 inches wide and 0.0043 inches
thick. That means that the ratio of the thickness to the width of a
dollar bill is $$ \\frac{\\mbox{Thickness}}{\\mbox{Width}} =
\\frac{0.0043 \\mbox{ inches}}{2.61 \\mbox{ inches}} = 0.0016 $$ or
slightly *more* than the disputed fraction of the budget. Hooray!
"That's all well and nice," you say, lowering your voice and leaning
over in a way that makes me uncomfortable, "but who is to *blame*?"
That's a great question! My answer will take the form of an experiment.
First, get a coin. Got it? Great. Now if you're Republican, let heads be
"The Republicans" and tails be "The Democrats." If you're a Democrat,
let heads be "The Democrats" and tails be "The Republicans." If you are
neither, then randomly assign a party to heads and allow the other to be
tails. Ready? The coin is to blame. [1] I use this in its original
meaning. That is, the guy whose job it was to do horribly gross things
at a carnival for money, not the guy whose main form of social
interaction is debating scenes in Star Wars on internet forums. A more
up-to-date comparison would have been to say "for the same reason that
people watch *Jersey Shore*." [2] That is, the budget for the 2011
fiscal year, which started on October 1st 2010. [3] Don't worry, all
members of Congress would be exempt from this and would still pick up
paychecks!
