Title: Life as an Experimenter - Day Two
Date: 2010-06-18 01:57:00
Tags: long, CHESS, experiment
Category: old
Slug: life-as-an-experimenter-day-two
Author: Jesse


Today I'm continuing my series on the life of an experimenter. Today is
the longest day, since we have beam time for all 24 hours. And after the
setbacks of yesterday, we feel compelled to use it to the utmost bit.
Read on for more tantalizing glimpses of the grit behind the glamor of
the rock-star-like lifestyle of an experimental physicist. Today had a
very different feel. Things were working, and that meant a lot of down
time waiting for data to collect. Despite the excitement of data coming
in, I was a little bored at points. Lots of internet use. Thursday 6/17
**7:15am** - Alarm goes off. 6.5 hours of sleep? Up quickly, and eat and
shower. Run into a couple of my housemates that I normally don't. I
don't feel to tired. Which is good, because I don't usually do caffeine,
if I had to now, it might well mess me up. **7:50** - Out of the house.
Taking my car, since my bike isn't working. **8:05** - At the F1
station. Matt is there, awake, looking not too much worse for ware. Ryan
comes in right behind me. I have to get a parking permit, which CHESS
kindly provides for visiting researchers. Since my car isn't registered
on campus, I qualify as a visiting researcher. **8:10** - Matt briefs us
on the progress of the night. Some good data was taken, and we've
switched from the helium to a liquid nitrogen (LN) cooling. He lays out
the set of experiments we should try to run today. Obvious that he needs
sleep. **8:45**- Matt goes home. Ryan and myself are on our own. Start a
data run. **9-10** - All the staff are checking in on us. After the
problems of yesterday, they want to make sure everything is running
smoothly. Which it is. **10:30** - Data running smoothly. When
everything goes well, for this particularly type of data set, there's
not much to be done while it's coming in. Put on the Greece vs. Nigeria
world cup game, streaming on my laptop. **11:30** - Data run finished.
Load up a new crystal smooth as can be. Start another data set.
Everything working like a charm. **12:30pm** - Lunch break. Much more
relaxed today. **2:00** - Data run done. Switching to a different type
of data run **2:15** - New run starts. Smooth sailing so far. **2:30** -
Put on Mexico vs. France world cup game. **3:30** - Attempting to start
a new run. Took us three or four tries to find a new crystal that was
good. Run good to go. **4:15** - We're trying to run at 80K, but we're
having problems with temperature stability. We talk to Ulrich, and he
thinks that we've got a partial ice plug in the LN line, reducing the LN
we can draw through. We can either waste two hours having it replaced,
or run with it as it is. No guarantee that it won't get worse. We decide
to run with it, we've lost too much beam time already. Our lowest
temperature seems to be \~90K. **5:15** - Data run finishes. New crystal
mounted. New data run started. **6:30**- Data run finishes. Two attempts
before we get a good crystal. Data flowing smoothly. **7:10** - Matt
returns. There is much rejoicing. **8:00**- Trying room temperature data
taking. Matt wants us to learn all the tricks this run, it seems. Having
trouble getting good crystals. **10:00**- Room temperature data giving
us a few interesting results. Trying a full run, but we're going to kill
the crystal long before that. X rays will kill proteins (that's why we
avoid them, ourselves). Faster at room temperature than at 100K.
**10:45** - Dinner from the stuff I packed this morning. I do love
microwaved leftovers. No rush, though. All three of us are in the lab,
and Ryan and Matt can handle whatever comes. **11:25** - Lots of trouble
getting good crystals (4 or 5 attempts?). 220K is a hard temperature.
Finally gave up and went to 240K. **11:55** - Ryan goes home. He'll be
back around 6 tomorrow. I'm sticking it out for a while. Interesting
data coming in around 240K. If we're skilled and lucky, we'll get
something around 220K also. Friday 6/18 **12:20am** - Potentially
exciting results! **12:45** - Reproducible potentially exciting results!
**1:15** - My brain can't do simple calculations right now, but we're
changing temperatures and trying out another look for our result at
240K. I hope it's there! **1:20** - Morale lower. Possibly the effect is
from a perfectly reasonable explainable thing. What a great hour though!
**1:45** - Data inconclusive but leaning towards no. Heading home. Leave
Matt all by his lonesome. **1:55** - Home. Sleep time. Alarm set for 9.
