Title: Your Week in Seminars Dark Edition
Date: 2010-11-08 15:46:00
Tags: 
Category: old
Slug: your-week-in-seminars-dark-edition
Author: Yariv


Good afternoon everyone, and welcome to another week of seminars here in
the physics department. Our theme of the week is dark matter - where
does it come from, how do we see it, and why is there so much of it.
Along with that we have a little more AdS/CFT, seemingly continuing last
week's subjects theme. All in all, it looks like seminars on similar
subjects tend to condense here in the department. We start with the
Monday Colloquium, where Richard Schnee from Syracuse University told us
about What's the Matter in the Universe? Direct Searches for WIMP Dark
Matter. Dark matter, we'll recall, is the astrophysics name for any kind
of matter that doesn't emit light - one that is not inside stars. Our
knowledge of our own solar system, which has its mass concentrated
almost entirely inside the sun, led us to expect that mass in the
universe in general would behave similarly. It turns out that the motion
of observed galaxies is not consistent with the mass we measure them to
have, and so we hypothesize the existence of non-luminary matter around
us. These days dark matter is an object of interest not only for
astrophysicists but for particle theorists as well. With our variety of
beyond-the-standard models of the universe we try to account for dark
matter, guess at its properties and explains why it is dark. That last
quality is rather easy to explain, in fact. Our expectation of dark
matter is simply that it does not interact electromagnetically, and so
does not emit photons. If we also posit that it does not interact
strongly, we are left with a particle that can only decay weakly, and so
we might expect a lot of it to stick around. Of course, the particle
must also have a mass, which is the original property we postulated for
it, and so we are looking for the WIMP, the Weakly Interacting Massive
Particle. Schnee talked about the various ways we hope to see WIMPs in
the coming decade, focusing on two avenues, the LHC and passive
detectors trying to pick up cosmic particles passing through the Earth.
WIMPs are by definitions hard to detect, because they interact only
Weakly and thus only weakly. This means that we can't actually see them
directly in our detectors, and we have to look for either missing energy
in accelerator results, which we deduce has gone to them, or their
effects on detectable particles in large particle reservoir, much as we
would detect neutrinos. Of course, when we have such weak signals the
art is in reducing the background noise, by putting them underground,
using the least radioactive materials we can find, and so on. The last
part of the talk revolved around two events in his own detector that
seemed to be far enough above background level to be WIMPs . Schnee then
explained how statistical analysis proved in fact these many statistical
outliers were, well, statistically expected, which I found very
interesting. There was also a mention at the very end, of another
experiment called DAMA, which is looking for a "WIMP wind", checking for
signals as the Earth moves through space in opposite directions, in a
kind of modern parallel of the Michelson-Morley experiment. This one has
actually shown a positive signal, though this is of course still
controversial. On Wednesday we had a local postdoc, Enrico Pajer, talk
about Striped holographic superonductor. I mentioned AdS/CFT last week,
and how it's induced some crossover between the condensed matter study
of high-temperature superconductors and particle physics. This was one
of those crossover seminars, with a few CM people in the audience.
Enrico spent about half of the talk introducing the audience to the
basics of superconductors - there were a lot of discontent as people
asked questions or had objections to statements which I imagine would
have gone over more smoothly with a condensed matter crowd . The bottom
line of the first half were three important attributes of
high-temperature superconductors, being a strong coupling between the
electrons, the existence of a quantum critical point and an
inhomogeneity of the material. There was then another general
introduction of the AdS/CFT duality, and I'll send you to last week's
summary (or the rest of the internet) if you want to hear more about
that. Enrico was working on a field theory in AdS space and trying to
apply the results to superconductors through the duality. In particular,
strong coupling and quantum criticalities are known features of the AdS
theory, and the addition here was of striped inhomogeneity, where things
change alone one axis only. This is incorporated into the AdS space by
applying boundary conditions, in particularl to the gauge field in the
relevant field theory, and reading the results by applying Einstein's,
Maxwells and the Klein-Gordon equations, in the bulk of the theory. One
interesting feature that was reproduced from other, non-AdS theories,
was the dependence of the critical temperature Tc on the inhomogeneity.
This is the temperature where superconductors turn into normal
conductors, and previous work had shown that it would to drop as the
scale of the inhomogeneity grows either very large or very small, and
have some maximum point for a finite scale of inhomogeneity. Enrico's
work showed a dropoff in Tc for inhomogeneity on very small scales,
giving the same qualitative behavior albeit with an exponential rather
than logarithmic dropoff. There were more details and math then, as they
studied these inhomogeneities in the AdS model, trying to determine the
conductivity along the stripes and perpendicular to them and so on,
producing some promising results and promising to produce some more.
Finally on Friday we had Kuver Sinha of Texas A&M talk about The
Cosmological Moduli Problem and Non-thermal Histories of the Universe.
As mentioned above, this talk revolved around dark matter as well,
though from a particle theory perspective. The trick in particle physics
is always making sure that your solution to one problem, in this case
dark matter, does not interfere with our solution to another problem.
The other problem here was the baryon asymmetry, or the overabundance of
matter compared with antimatter in the universe. In particle physics the
two are generally sides of the same coin and we have no reason to prefer
one or the other, and so we must have some reason that we only observe
regular matter in the universe. There is a well-established model for
this, called nucleosynthesis, and now when we explain the amount of dark
matter in the universe we have to keep from interfering with it. And
while we're at it, we might solve a third problem - why is the density
of dark matter and regular matter in the universe on the same order of
magnitude? Sinha went through this, presenting two models of baryon
genesis, occurring at different times in the history of the universe,
each with their own features problems. Finally, he suggested one
solution to the coincidence problem that is non-thermal - that is,
rather than configuring the equilibrium point of matter and dark matter
to be similar separately, we have them coming from the same source with
similar decay rate. And that was that for last week, as dark matter
obscures the better-lit one. This week have a sweeping overview of
particle physics, toric singularities on branes, and possibly some news
from the LHC. See you in seven.
