<--
.. title: The Law and Large Numbers
.. date: 2010-12-09 22:34:00
.. tags: large numbers, budget, politics
.. category: old
.. slug: the-law-and-large-numbers
.. author: Alemi
.. has_math: true
-->


Human beings are not equipped for dealing with large numbers. Honestly,
7 thousand, 7 million, 7 billion and 7 trillion all register about the
same in my mind, namely 7 big. Unfortunately, there is a world a
different between each of these, three whole orders of magnitude, a
thousand, the difference between lifting me and a US quarter. This lack
of respect for orders of magnitude has really been rearing its head
recently with most of the political discussions surrounding the US
budget. Turns out the US Budget is really large. In 2010 it weighed in
at $3.55 trillion. Thats big. Really big. So big that I can't fathom it.
Without getting too political, there has been a site going around
recently; the [You Cut
program](http://republicanwhip.house.gov/YouCut/week13.htm), which
invites public suggestions for cuts to be made to the budget to try and
fix the deficit. Now, personally, I believe we ought to do something
about the deficit. To this end, I think it is useful to point out the
scales involved. In particular, the link I gave above is to one of the
suggested cuts: federal funding of NPR (Disclaimer alert: I love NPR),
which weighs in at 7 million dollars. Seven million dollars is a lot of
money. A lot of money, more than I can imagine having personally. But to
suggest that a 7 million dollar cut is any sort of progress towards
solving a $1.2 trillion dollar deficit is a little amusing. As a
fraction, this comes out to $$ \frac{ 7 \text{ million} }{ 3.55
\text{ trillion} } = 2 \times 10^{-6} $$ Two parts in a million. To
give a sense of scale to this, the gravitational influence of the moon
on my weight is: $$ \frac{ \frac{ G M_{\text{moon}} }{
R_{\text{earth-moon}}^2 } }{ 10 \text{ m/s}^2 } = 3 \times
10^{-6} $$ Three parts in a million. So, suggesting that you have made
real gains in reducing the US budget by cutting federal funding for NPR
is as silly as suggesting that if I want to lose weight, my first
concern should be the current tides. [I want to point out that I don't
really mean to get too political, and that I've noticed both parties
pulling these kinds of numbers tricks.] So, wanting to get a little
better understanding of the numbers at stake, I collected some data (all
from the 2010 budget). My goal is to attempt to represent how the US
government spends its money. Before I begin I need to plug two great
tools towards this end:
[Here](http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2010/02/01/us/budget.html) the
NYTimes graphically represents government spending, helping to give a
sense of scale to different categories.
[Here](http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2010/11/13/weekinreview/deficits-graphic.html)
the NYTimes lets you try and balance the budget, not only for next year
but down the line, letting you choose from a wide array of proposed
changes. The Data So, below is a list of some of the relevant numbers I
could thing of, and some reference numbers (trillion, billion, million),
as well as the US debt, and total deficit. In addition to just reporting
the numbers (which you can find anywhere), in the second column I give
the fraction of total spending in scientific units.

  ---------------- --------------- ----------
  Name             $               Fraction
  US Debt          13.8 trillion   3.9
  Total Spending   3.55 trillion   1.0
  Budget Deficit   1.17 trillion   3.3E-1
  1 trillion       1 trillion      2.8E-1
  SS / Def / MM    730 billion     2.1E-1
  Education        93 billion      2.6E-2
  Taxes (250G+)    54 billion      1.5E-2
  Science          31 billion      8.7E-3
  1 billion        1 billion       2.8E-4
  NPR              7 million       2.0E-6
  1 million        1 million       2.8E-7
  ---------------- --------------- ----------

So here, SS / Def / MM means each of Social Security, Defense spending
and Medicare and Medicaid, which each comes in at about the same per
program. We spend 730 billion on each of these. To first glance, these
three programs are how the US spends money, each of these coming in at
21%. Notice also just how large the deficit is, coming in at 33% of
total spending. The rather cryptic "Taxes (250G+)" is how much money
would be saved by letting the Bush tax cuts expire for those making more
than 250,000 a year, a currently hotly debated topic. Notice that it
would only ease the burden by 15%. So this alone would only cut the
budget deficit in half. The above table shows the power of scientific
notation. (Even though I had to use the ugly "E" notation). A number
like "2.8E-4" is really 2.9 x 10^(-4). But honestly, even a list like
this doesn't really make an impact for me. So, I thought of a couple
other ways to represent the same numbers, scaling them to some 'big'
things I can conceive of:

### Barry's Budget

Now, this might not be a fair comparison, but let's scale down the US
budget to sizes that a person can understand. By scaling by a factor of
$100 million, we end up with the story of my friend Barry.

  ---------------- --------------- ---------- -------------
  Name             $               Fraction   Barry
  US Debt          13.8 trillion   3.9        $138,495.50
  Total Spending   3.55 trillion   1.0        $35,500.00
  Budget Deficit   1.17 trillion   3.3E-1     $11,690.0
  1 trillion       1 trillion      2.8E-1     $10,000.00
  SS / Def / MM    730 billion     2.1E-1     $7,296.67
  Education        93 billion      2.6E-2     $930.00
  Taxes (250G+)    54 billion      1.5E-2     $540.00
  Science          31 billion      8.7E-3     $310.00
  1 billion        1 billion       2.8E-4     $10.00
  NPR              7 million       2.0E-6     $0.07
  1 million        1 million       2.8E-7     $0.01
  ---------------- --------------- ---------- -------------

As you'll notice, Barry makes $23,810.00 a year (total receipts)[he's a
grad student], but spends $35,500 a year. This has created his current
debt problem. Barry has $138,495 in credit card debt, and still
overspends by $11,690 a year. How does Barry spend his money? Well,
every year Barry buys some $7,300 in guns, spends another $14,600 mostly
taking care of his grandma. He pays a tuition of $930 a year at school,
and $310 on science books. Every year he donates 7 cents to NPR. Every
million US dollars is 1 penny in Barry dollars.

### Work Week

That might not have been fair. This time, lets scale the US government
spending to a work week of 40 hours. I think a work week is a large
amount of time that I still have a real grasp for.

  ---------------- --------------- -------------- -----------------------
  Name             $               Work Time      Guess at time
  US Debt          13.8 trillion   156 hours      Work month
  Total Spending   3.55 trillion   40 hours       Work week
  Budget Deficit   1.17 trillion   13 hours       All Mon and Tue morn
  1 trillion       1 trillion      11.3 hours     two days of good work
  SS / Def / MM    730 billion     8.2 hour       true work in a day
  Education        93 billion      63 minutes     lunch break
  Taxes (250G+)    54 billion      36 minutes     cooler chat
  Science          31 billion      21 minutes     Show on Hulu
  1 billion        1 billion       40 seconds     Stretching at desk
  NPR              7 million       0.3 seconds    mouse click
  1 million        1 million       0.04 seconds   blink
  ---------------- --------------- -------------- -----------------------

### Cross Country

Now lets scale to a distance. The longest drive I've ever done is from
Los Angeles, CA to Orlando, Fl, which was 2511 miles. In terms of this
scale, the budget breaks down as:

  ---------------- --------------- --------- ------------------
  Name             $               Dist      
  US Debt          13.8 trillion   9796 mi   NY - Sydney
  Total Spending   3.55 trillion   2511 mi   LA - Orlando
  Budget Deficit   1.17 trillion   827 mi    Texas
  1 trillion       1 trillion      707 mi    
  SS / Def / MM    730 billion     516 mi    Orlando - Mobile
  Education        93 billion      66 mi     
  Taxes (250G+)    54 billion      38 mi     
  Science          31 billion      22 mi     Cross town
  1 billion        1 billion       0.7 mi    14 blocks
  NPR              7 million       9 yards   
  1 million        1 million       4 feet    
  ---------------- --------------- --------- ------------------

(So I just want to point out again, claiming that cutting NPR funding
makes a dent in the US budget is similar to claiming you've moved closer
to Orlando (while in LA) by crossing the room.)

The Lesson
----------

So, without getting too political... I'd just like to point out that if
our politicians are serious about solving the budget crisis, they need
to stop talking about million dollar programs, and start taking about
100 billion dollar ones. The problem is that it's hard to either slash
funding for large programs like defense, or social security, and it's
even harder raise taxes (really at all). But if we never consider those
options, we're never going to get out of the rut. In my undergraduate
physics lab, the instructor had a mantra: "A number without context is
meaningless". Now, he originally meant the statement to be a lesson on
how important it is to quote errors on your measurements, but I think I
can adapt it to apply to giving out numbers like 7 billion without a
sense of scale.
