Title: Freezing in Space I - Blackest Night
Date: 2010-05-12 22:26:00
Tags: power, space, freeze, blackbody, radiation, human
Category: old
Slug: freezing-in-space-i-blackest-night
Author: Jesse

In the last post I made, I discussed the fact that <a href="http://thevirtuosi.blogspot.com/2010/05/human-radiation.html">humans radiate energy</a>. &nbsp;In that post I calculated that we actually radiate quite a lot of power. &nbsp;This immediately raises a few questions, the most obvious one being: How long would it take you to freeze in space? &nbsp;This question is multifaceted, and I'm going to split it between two parts. &nbsp;This first part, 'Blackest Night' is how quickly we'd freeze if we were completely lost in space, nothing anywhere near. &nbsp;The second part, 'Turn On The Sun!' will address what would happen in near earth orbit.<br /><br /><br /><a name='more'></a><br />We need to clarify what we mean when we say freezing in space. &nbsp;The fatal temperature change for a human is (according to the all knowing internet), roughly a drop of 7C. &nbsp;If you remember my previous post, we calculated that we would radiate about 860 W. &nbsp;Now, we have to ask how much energy it takes to change our temperature by 7 C. &nbsp;Well, as I've discussed a <a href="http://thevirtuosi.blogspot.com/2010/04/beer-diet.html#more">few</a>&nbsp;<a href="http://thevirtuosi.blogspot.com/2010/04/falling-water-hot-or-cold.html">times</a>, the energy it takes to change the temperature is given by<br />\[Q=mc\Delta T\]<br />The mass of a human is ~75 kg. &nbsp;We're mostly water, so let's just assume that we are all water. &nbsp;This gives us a specific heat of 4.2 kJ/kg*K. &nbsp;The energy needed for our 7 C temperature change is then<br />\[Q=(75kg)(4.2kJ/kg*K)(7K)=2.2 MJ\]<br /><br />By the time we have dropped to 30 C, we are only radiating a power of<br />\[P=eA\sigma T^4\=(.97)(1.7m^2)(5.67\cdot10^{-8}W/m^2K^4)(303K)^4=790W\]<br />Let us assume that the average power radiated is the geometric average of these two powers,<br />\[P_{avg}=\sqrt{(860W)(790W)}\approx825W\]<br />This gives us a time to freeze of<br />\[t=\frac{2.2MJ}{825W}\approx2700s\]<br />This is ~45 minutes. &nbsp;So you've got 45 minutes until a deadly freeze in deep space. &nbsp;Seems a rather long time, does it not? &nbsp;I'm fairly certain that you'd freeze much faster in antarctica than deep space. &nbsp;Why? &nbsp;Because in Antarctica you have more cooling mechanisms that just radiation, you have conduction in the air around you and convection of that warmer air away from your skin. &nbsp;If you're adrift in space, for all that it is rather cold, the good news is that you'll asphyxiate before you freeze!<br /><br />All of this was done assuming that there's no energy gain from anywhere. &nbsp;That is, that we're stuck somewhere in the deepest space, the blackest night. &nbsp;Tomorrow we'll consider what would happen if you were in near earth orbit, with all of these lovely energy sources around, particularly the sun.
