Title: Futile Feudal Experiments and the Importance of a Scientific Education
Date: 2010-10-25 00:48:00
Tags: i got better
Category: old
Slug: futile-feudal-experiments-and-the-importance-of-a-scientific-education
Author: Corky

It's that time of year again. &nbsp;The leaves have turned, the nights come sooner and in a few days hordes of monsters will descend upon the homes of America making demands and thinly veiled threats. &nbsp;That's right, ladies and gentlemen, it's election season. &nbsp;And like any good campaign season, this one has been full of lies, distortions, and half-truths offered in the form of slogans, minute long tv ads and 30 second long "debate" responses that do little more than insult the voter's intelligence and make George Washington roll over in his grave. &nbsp;Don't worry, this is not a political blog [1] and we offer no suggestions on how to vote (early and often?). &nbsp;However, we do see in this inane politicking a great motivation for an improvement to the way we do science education in this country.<br /><br />We begin with an outstanding example of scientific education that seems surprisingly fitting for the season. &nbsp;It's the witch scene from Monty Python and the Holy Grail [2]:<br /><br /><object height="385" width="640"><param name="movie" value="http://www.youtube.com/v/zrzMhU_4m-g?fs=1&amp;hl=en_US"></param><param name="allowFullScreen" value="true"></param><param name="allowscriptaccess" value="always"></param><embed src="http://www.youtube.com/v/zrzMhU_4m-g?fs=1&amp;hl=en_US" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" allowscriptaccess="always" allowfullscreen="true" width="640" height="385"></embed></object><br /><br />Now this scene is great not just because it is funny (it is), but because it makes a nice observation of human nature: people love logic and patterns. &nbsp;We love nice, orderly, linear explanations of cause and effect. &nbsp;This ability and desire to explain the world around us is what makes us special. &nbsp;However, a love of logic is not necessarily a love of <i>good</i>&nbsp;logic, as evidenced by the most scientific of Arthur's knights, Sir Bedemir.<br /><br />In the video Bedemir makes a series of claims that each follow in some way from the last. &nbsp;Each claim is not in itself entirely unbelievable in the same way that claiming the world is flat is not entirely unbelievable [3]. &nbsp;That is, it "feels" right so long as we don't apply any sort of critical thought to it at all. &nbsp;And this is where the problem really lies. &nbsp;We naturally love to see patterns and follow "logical" progressions, but we aren't necessarily the best critical thinkers. Instead, we need to learn and practice our critical thinking skills. &nbsp;This is where a good science and math education comes in.<br /><br />[fix this transition]<br /><br />Without the ability to critically examine arguments presented to us, we tend to fall for nonsense that's strung together in a way that gives the appearance of logic. &nbsp;A lot of times this is harmless. &nbsp;Take for example the habits of athletes. &nbsp;"Well, the last two times I wore these socks I got a hit. &nbsp;Therefore I should wear these all the time." &nbsp;That's obviously a silly argument, but it's not really doing any harm.<br /><br />&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; <br /><br /><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: inherit;">[1] &nbsp;</span><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: inherit; white-space: pre;">We're an anarcho-syndicalist commune.  We take i</span><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: inherit; white-space: pre;">t in turns to act as a sort of executive officer for the week. </span><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: inherit; white-space: pre;">But all the decision of that officer have to be ratified </span><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: inherit; white-space: pre;">at a special biweekly meeting. </span><span class="Apple-style-span" style="white-space: pre;"><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: inherit;">By a simple majority in the case of purely internal affairs, b</span></span><span class="Apple-style-span" style="white-space: pre;"><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: inherit;">ut by a two-thirds majority in the case of more...</span></span><br /><span class="Apple-style-span" style="white-space: pre;"><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: inherit;"> </span></span><br /><span class="Apple-style-span" style="white-space: pre;"><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: inherit;">[2]  We own none of the rights here and got it from Youtube, which is owned by Google, who claims to do no evil.  So, logically, it's all cool man.</span></span><br /><span class="Apple-style-span" style="white-space: pre;"><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: inherit;"><br /></span></span><br /><span class="Apple-style-span" style="white-space: pre;"><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: inherit;">[3]  </span></span><a href="http://theflatearthsociety.org/cms/">http://theflatearthsociety.org/cms/</a>&nbsp;: &nbsp;It's real and it's spectacular.
