Title: Letting Air Out of Tires
Date: 2010-05-03 23:21:00
Tags: bike, tire, thermodynamics, gas, cold, experiment
Category: old
Slug: letting-air-out-of-tires
Author: Jesse

<span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: Georgia, 'Times New Roman', serif;">Have you ever noticed how when you let air out of a bike tire (or, I suppose, a car tire) it feels rather cold? &nbsp;Today we're going to explore why that is, and just how cold it is. &nbsp;Many people consider the air escaping from a tire as a classic example of an adiabatic process. &nbsp;What is an adiabatic process? &nbsp;It is a process that happens so quickly there is no time for heat flow to occur. &nbsp;For our air in the bike tire this means we're letting it out of the tire so quickly that no energy can move into it from the surrounding air.</span><br /><br /><a name='more'></a><br /><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: Georgia, 'Times New Roman', serif;">This may not be exactly true, there may be a little energy flow, but there is little enough that we can ignore it. &nbsp;Given that, how do we talk about temperature change? &nbsp;Let's give a physical motivation first. &nbsp;Imagine a gas as a collection of hard spheres, like baseballs. &nbsp;Envision this bunch of baseballs in a box. &nbsp;Suppose you make the volume of the box smaller, you move the walls in. &nbsp;The baseballs will start to bounce around faster. &nbsp;Having trouble thinking of this? &nbsp;Think of a single baseball in a box. &nbsp;Imagine it hits a wall moving towards it. &nbsp;What happens? &nbsp;That's just like what happens when a baseball hits a baseball bat moving towards it, it goes flying. &nbsp;That is, it starts moving faster. &nbsp;The speed with which these gas particles are moving is what we measure as temperature. &nbsp;So shrinking our box increases the temperature. &nbsp;Likewise, expanding our box will decrease the temperature. &nbsp;The same principle holds here. &nbsp;Our gas is expanding from a small volume (the bike tire) into a larger volume (the surrounding world). &nbsp;Thus we expect the temperature to decrease.</span><br /><div><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: Georgia, 'Times New Roman', serif;"><br /></span></div><div><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: Georgia, 'Times New Roman', serif;">Got all that? &nbsp;Good. &nbsp;Now for some math. &nbsp;It turns out that using the ideal gas law, we can derive that for an (reversible) adiabatic process</span></div><div><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: Georgia, 'Times New Roman', serif;">\[PV^\gamma=constant\]</span></div><div><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: Georgia, 'Times New Roman', serif;">where P is the pressure of the gas, V is the volume of the gas, and gamma is (for our purposes) just a number. &nbsp;The ideal gas law states that</span></div><div><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: Georgia, 'Times New Roman', serif;">\[PV=NkT\]</span></div><div><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: Georgia, 'Times New Roman', serif;">Where N is the number of gas molecules we have, T is the temperature of the gas, and k is a constant. &nbsp;Since N doesn't change in the process we're considering, we can use this to rewrite the above equation, by substituting for V. &nbsp;This gives</span></div><div><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: Georgia, 'Times New Roman', serif;">\[P^{1-\gamma}T^{\gamma}=constant\]</span></div><div><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: Georgia, 'Times New Roman', serif;">Where the constant is not the same as above.</span></div><div><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: Georgia, 'Times New Roman', serif;"><br /></span></div><div><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: Georgia, 'Times New Roman', serif;">Because this is equal to a constant, we can say that our initial pressure and temperature are related to our final pressure and temperature by</span></div><div><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: Georgia, 'Times New Roman', serif;">\[P_i^{1-\gamma}T_i^{\gamma}=P_f^{1-\gamma}T_f^{\gamma}\]</span></div><div><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: Georgia, 'Times New Roman', serif;">We can solve this for the final temperature giving</span></div><div><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: Georgia, 'Times New Roman', serif;">\[T_f=T_i\left(\frac{P_i}{P_f}\right)^{\tfrac{1-\gamma}{\gamma}}\]</span></div><div><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: Georgia, 'Times New Roman', serif;">Finally, we can plug in some numbers. &nbsp;Gamma is 7/5 for diatomic gases (which is most of air). &nbsp;If we assume the air is about room temperature, 20 C, and the tire is at 60 psi, this gives (1 atmosphere of pressure is 15 psi):</span></div><div><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: Georgia, 'Times New Roman', serif;">\[T_f=293K\left(\frac{60 psi}{15 psi}\right)^{\tfrac{1-7/5}{7/5}}=197K\]</span></div><div><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: Georgia, 'Times New Roman', serif;">Converting back from Kelvin to C, this is -76 C or -105 F. &nbsp;That's cold!</span></div><div><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: Georgia, 'Times New Roman', serif;"><br /></span></div><div><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: Georgia, 'Times New Roman', serif;"><br /></span></div><div><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: Georgia, 'Times New Roman', serif;"><b>For the Expert:</b></span></div><div><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: Georgia, 'Times New Roman', serif;">There is actually a debate as to whether or not adiabatic cooling is responsible for the chill of air upon being let out of a tire. &nbsp;The argument for it is fairly straightforward. &nbsp;The released air does work on the surrounding atmosphere as it leaves, lowering the energy of the gas. &nbsp;If this is the primary effect, then the change in temperature is given above. &nbsp;However, it is possible that we can consider this a free adiabatic expansion. &nbsp;In a free adiabatic expansion (like a gas expanding into a vacuum), there is no work done, because gas is not acting 'against' anything.</span></div><div><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: Georgia, 'Times New Roman', serif;"><br /></span></div><div><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: Georgia, 'Times New Roman', serif;">The other possibility is the&nbsp;<a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joule%E2%80%93Thomson_effect">Joule-Thomson effect</a>. &nbsp;I don't claim to understand this effect very thoroughly, but it is another mechanism for cooling when air is let out of a well insulated valve. &nbsp;I've seen claims both ways as to which process is actually responsible for cooling.</span></div><div><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: Georgia, 'Times New Roman', serif;"><br /></span></div><div><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-family: Georgia, 'Times New Roman', serif;">Fortunately, a simple experiment suggests itself. &nbsp;Helium heats up through the Joule-Thomson effect (when it starts abot ~50K). &nbsp;It will cool down through the above described adiabatic cooling. &nbsp;So, fill a bike tire with Helium gas, and let it out. &nbsp;See if the valve/gas feels hot or cold. &nbsp;This will determine the dominant effect. &nbsp;As an experimentalist, this <a href="http://www.brightlywound.com/?comic=42">appeals greatly to me</a>. &nbsp;But if any theorists out there have ideas, please speak up.</span></div>
