Title: Life as an Experimenter - Day Two
Date: 2010-06-18 01:57:00
Tags: long, CHESS, experiment
Category: old
Slug: life-as-an-experimenter-day-two
Author: Jesse

Today I'm continuing my series on the life of an experimenter. &nbsp;Today is the longest day, since we have beam time for all 24 hours. &nbsp;And after the setbacks of yesterday, we feel compelled to use it to the utmost bit. &nbsp;Read on for more tantalizing glimpses of the grit behind the glamor of the rock-star-like lifestyle of an experimental physicist.<br /><br /><a name='more'></a>Today had a very different feel. &nbsp;Things were working, and that meant a lot of down time waiting for data to collect. &nbsp;Despite the excitement of data coming in, I was a little bored at points. &nbsp;Lots of internet use.<br /><br />Thursday 6/17<br /><b>7:15am</b>&nbsp;- Alarm goes off. &nbsp;6.5 hours of sleep? &nbsp;Up quickly, and eat and shower. &nbsp;Run into a couple of my housemates that I normally don't. &nbsp;I don't feel to tired. &nbsp;Which is good, because I don't usually do caffeine, if I had to now, it might well mess me up.<br /><br /><b>7:50</b>&nbsp;- Out of the house. &nbsp;Taking my car, since my bike isn't working.<br /><br /><b>8:05</b>&nbsp;- At the F1 station. &nbsp;Matt is there, awake, looking not too much worse for ware. &nbsp;Ryan comes in right behind me. &nbsp;I have to get a parking permit, which CHESS kindly provides for visiting researchers. &nbsp;Since my car isn't registered on campus, I qualify as a visiting researcher.<br /><br /><b>8:10</b>&nbsp;- Matt briefs us on the progress of the night. &nbsp;Some good data was taken, and we've switched from the helium to a liquid nitrogen (LN) cooling. &nbsp;He lays out the set of experiments we should try to run today. &nbsp;Obvious that he needs sleep.<br /><br /><b>8:45 </b>- Matt goes home. &nbsp;Ryan and myself are on our own. &nbsp;Start a data run.<br /><br /><b>9-10</b>&nbsp;- All the staff are checking in on us. &nbsp;After the problems of yesterday, they want to make sure everything is running smoothly. &nbsp;Which it is.<br /><br /><b>10:30</b>&nbsp;- Data running smoothly. &nbsp;When everything goes well, for this particularly type of data set, there's not much to be done while it's coming in. &nbsp;Put on the Greece vs. Nigeria world cup game, streaming on my laptop.<br /><br /><b>11:30</b>&nbsp;- Data run finished. &nbsp;Load up a new crystal smooth as can be. &nbsp;Start another data set. &nbsp;Everything working like a charm.<br /><br /><b>12:30pm</b>&nbsp;- Lunch break. &nbsp;Much more relaxed today.<br /><br /><b>2:00</b>&nbsp;- Data run done. &nbsp;Switching to a different type of data run<br /><br /><b>2:15</b>&nbsp;- New run starts. &nbsp;Smooth sailing so far.<br /><br /><b>2:30</b>&nbsp;- Put on Mexico vs. France world cup game.<br /><br /><b>3:30</b>&nbsp;- Attempting to start a new run. &nbsp;Took us three or four tries to find a new crystal that was good. &nbsp;Run good to go.<br /><br /><b>4:15</b>&nbsp;-&nbsp;We're trying to run at 80K, but we're having problems with temperature stability. We talk to Ulrich, and he thinks that we've got a partial ice plug in the LN line, reducing the LN we can draw through. &nbsp;We can either waste two hours having it replaced, or run with it as it is. &nbsp;No guarantee that it won't get worse. &nbsp;We decide to run with it, we've lost too much beam time already. &nbsp;Our lowest temperature seems to be ~90K.<br /><br /><b>5:15</b>&nbsp;- Data run finishes. &nbsp;New crystal mounted. &nbsp;New data run started.<br /><br /><b>6:30 </b>- Data run finishes. &nbsp;Two attempts before we get a good crystal. &nbsp;Data flowing smoothly.<br /><br /><b>7:10</b>&nbsp;- Matt returns. &nbsp;There is much rejoicing.<br /><br /><b>8:00 </b>- Trying room temperature data taking. &nbsp;Matt wants us to learn all the tricks this run, it seems. &nbsp;Having trouble getting good crystals.<br /><br /><b>10:00 </b>- Room temperature data giving us a few interesting results. &nbsp;Trying a full run, but we're going to kill the crystal long before that. &nbsp;X rays will kill proteins (that's why we avoid them, ourselves). &nbsp;Faster at room temperature than at 100K.<br /><br /><b>10:45</b>&nbsp;- Dinner from the stuff I packed this morning. &nbsp;I do love microwaved leftovers. &nbsp;No rush, though. &nbsp;All three of us are in the lab, and Ryan and Matt can handle whatever comes.<br /><br /><b>11:25</b> - Lots of trouble getting good crystals (4 or 5 attempts?). &nbsp;220K is a hard temperature. &nbsp;Finally gave up and went to 240K.<br /><br /><b>11:55</b> - Ryan goes home. &nbsp;He'll be back around 6 tomorrow. &nbsp;I'm sticking it out for a while. &nbsp;Interesting data coming in around 240K. &nbsp;If we're skilled and lucky, we'll get something around 220K also.<br /><br /><br />Friday 6/18<br /><b>12:20am</b> - Potentially exciting results!<br /><br /><b>12:45</b> - Reproducible potentially exciting results!<br /><br /><b>1:15</b> - My brain can't do simple calculations right now, but we're changing temperatures and trying out another look for our result at 240K. &nbsp;I hope it's there!<br /><br /><b>1:20</b> - Morale lower. &nbsp;Possibly the effect is from a perfectly reasonable explainable thing. &nbsp;What a great hour though!<br /><br /><b>1:45</b> - Data inconclusive but leaning towards no. &nbsp;Heading home. &nbsp;Leave Matt all by his lonesome.<br /><br /><b>1:55</b> - Home. &nbsp;Sleep time. &nbsp;Alarm set for 9.
