Title: Life as an Experimenter - Reflections
Date: 2010-06-19 15:50:00
Tags: reflection, CHESS, experiment
Category: old
Slug: life-as-an-experimenter-reflections
Author: Jesse

I've been doing experimental physics for about three years. &nbsp;I started during my sophomore year in college, went straight to graduate school, and continued here (albeit not quite immediately). &nbsp;There are people out there who have been doing this for a lot longer than I have, but I've gained a few insights, by working with said people, and through my own experiences in the lab. &nbsp;I thought I'd try to share a few of these, to help illuminate the past few days I blogged about.<br /><br /><a name='more'></a><b>Something Always Goes Wrong</b><br />It's the nature of experimental science. &nbsp;Something always goes wrong. &nbsp;It might be your equipment, it might be your sample, hell, it might be something personal. &nbsp;But something will go wrong. &nbsp;Wednesday was a prime example. &nbsp;Not only did I get soaked by rain and temporarily lose my bike lock, but it took us 9 hours to really start taking data due to equipment problems. &nbsp;I think this is endemic in what we're doing. &nbsp;We're trying to investigate something that no one has ever done (at least not quite exactly what we're doing). &nbsp;This means that we're usually pushing the bounds of our equipment and setup. &nbsp;Not just that, but most of the equipment is exceedingly complex, giving it many more places it can break down.<br /><br /><b>It's An Emotional Roller Coaster</b><br />Sometimes nothing works. &nbsp;At all. &nbsp;You try and try and you just can't make it work. &nbsp;Then sometimes everything is going well. &nbsp;You're getting data, and not just that, but the data looks good. &nbsp;Whether it's confirming or destroying your expectations, you're finding out something new about the world. &nbsp;It's exciting. &nbsp;You find something interesting and start chasing it. &nbsp;However, you have to be careful. &nbsp;Often the result is not what you think you're seeing. &nbsp;It's a false signal from your equipment, or attributable to the background material doing something strange. &nbsp;Or you've destroyed the sample, and that's why it's &nbsp;not doing what you expect. &nbsp;You go up and down quite a bit.<br /><br /><b>It's Exhausting</b><br />Part of it is the long hours. &nbsp;But really, 16 hour days are not *that* bad. &nbsp;Sleeping 6.5-7 hours. &nbsp;I can usually do that, no problem. &nbsp;So what's different when it's research? &nbsp;You have to be thinking all the time. &nbsp;For 16 hours. &nbsp;In general, you can't just push the button and wait. &nbsp;You need to look at the data while it comes in, to determine what data to take next. &nbsp;Combine that with the emotional up and down . . . even though you're not necessarily physically exhausted, you're mentally worn out.<br /><br /><b>You Get More Questions Than Answers</b><br />My undergraduate advisor would always say that when you're doing research you generate three questions for every question you answer. &nbsp;That's more or less true. &nbsp;It is very rare to go out and answer all the questions you have. &nbsp;It is even more rare to not get more questions. &nbsp; &nbsp;There's always more to learn. &nbsp;In many ways, that's great, though a little frustrating. &nbsp;If we ran out of questions, we'd probably run out of a job. &nbsp;But there's always another twist that you didn't expect nature to have, something else surprising you. &nbsp;That's why we do it. &nbsp;There's no finality in research. &nbsp;We can't get all the answers, ever.<br /><br /><br />A lot of our time isn't data taking, but making/setting up our equipment, analyzing data, and such things. &nbsp;Still, I hope that this series of posts has given you a taste of what we scientists may do when we're taking data.
