Title: The Impossibility of Why
Date: 2010-07-01 23:44:00
Tags: why, physics
Category: old
Slug: the-impossibility-of-why
Author: Jesse

So I think we've all been rather busy here. &nbsp;Hence the lack of posts. &nbsp;I'm going to try to keep this one short but sweet. &nbsp;A lot of people think that physics tells us why things happen. &nbsp;Why is the sky blue? &nbsp;Why does the earth orbit the sun? &nbsp;Why does copper transmit electricity so well? &nbsp;These all seem like perfectly reasonable questions to ask. &nbsp;Questions that we, as physicists can answer. &nbsp;Yet, I entitled this post the impossibility of why.<br /><br />In general, questions about why are not good questions for physicists &nbsp; More accurately we answer questions about how. &nbsp;Or what. &nbsp;What phenomena causes use to see the sky as blue? &nbsp;What forces cause the earth to orbit the sun? &nbsp;How does copper transmit electricity so well? &nbsp;In general, we can't answer a question of why.<br /><br /><a name='more'></a><br />A friend once asked me (at the end of a talk I gave, nonetheless) 'why can't two electrons be in the same quantum state, while two bosons can?'. &nbsp;That's an example of a question that we as physicists can't answer. We have no idea about why that is. &nbsp;The best answer we can give is 'I don't know. &nbsp;However, experiment tells us that's what happens.'<br /><br />In general, physics cannot be built in a vacuum. &nbsp;We cannot sit down and write down the laws of nature. &nbsp;Not without looking at nature. &nbsp;That is the difference between physics and mathematics. &nbsp;Mathematicians can construct arbitrary logical systems. &nbsp;Anything with a given set of logical axioms that is consistent can be a valid system of mathematics. &nbsp;Of course, only a few are useful systems. &nbsp;This allows mathematicians to generate exceedingly interesting playgrounds for the mind.<br /><br />Physics is meaningless without experiment. &nbsp;We have to test our theories against the world as we know it. &nbsp;We can no more explain why F = ma or the Pauli exclusion principle is the way of the world than we can answer why the universe exists. &nbsp;We can (at least we hope) tell you how the world works, what to expect, cause and effect. &nbsp;But why we found this particular set of rules and not another, different but consistent system, is something we can't, and usually don't try to answer.<br /><br />In many ways, I think this reduces much of the perceived conflict between religion and science. &nbsp;As long as one doesn't read God's (or gods, depending on your religion) word literally, religion is an attempt to explain why. &nbsp;Physics is an attempt to explain how. &nbsp;There's no inherent conflict in that. &nbsp;At least, that's my thinking.
