<--
.. title: Nobody Really Gets Quantum
.. date: 2010-04-22 14:29:00
.. tags: 
.. category: old
.. slug: nobody-really-gets-quantum
.. author: Yariv
-->


Nobody Really Gets Quantum / [Etgar Keret](http://www.etgarkeret.com/)
On [Yom Kippur eve](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yom_Kippur#Eve) Quantum
walked over to Einstein's house to seek forgiveness. "I'm not home,"
shouted Einstein from behind a closed door. On the way home people
taunted him and somebody even hit him with an empty can of coke. Quantum
pretended not to care, but deep inside he was really hurt. Nobody really
gets Quantum, everybody hates him. "You parasite" people cry out when
he's walking down the street, "why are you dodging the draft?" - "I
wanted to enlist," Quantum tries to say, "but they wouldn't take me,
because I'm so small." Not that anybody listens to Quantum. Nobody
listens to Quantum when he tries to speak up for himself, but when he
says something that can be misconstrued, oh, then suddenly everybody's
paying attention. Quantum can say something innocent like "wow, what a
cat!" and right away the news says he's making provocations and run off
to talk to Schrodinger. And anyway, the media hates Quantum most,
because once when he was interviewed in Scientific American Quantum said
that the observer affects the observed event, and all the journalists
thought he was talking about the coverage of the
[Intifada](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/First_Intifada) and claimed he
was deliberately inciting the masses. And Quantum can keep talking until
tomorrow about how he didn't mean it and he has no political
affiliation, nobody believes him anyway. Everybody knows he's friends
with [Yuval
Ne'eman.](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yuval_Neeman#Political_career) A
lot of people think Quantum is heartless, that he has no feelings, but
that's not true at all. On Friday, after a documentary on Hiroshima, he
was on the expert panel. And he couldn't even speak. Just sat in front
of the open mic and cried, and all of the viewers at home, that don't
really know Quantum, couldn't understand that Quantum was crying, they
just thought he was avoiding the question. And the sad thing about it
is, even if Quantum writes dozens of letters to the editors of all the
scientific journals in the world and proves beyond any doubt that for
the whole atomic bomb thing he was just being used and he never thought
it would end this way, it wouldn't help him, because nobody really gets
quantum. Least of all the physicists. from the original Hebrew by me;
posted without permission. Originally from [The Girl on the
Fridge](http://www.amazon.com/Girl-Fridge-Stories-Etgar-Keret/dp/0374531056/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1271963967&sr=8-1)where
you can find somebody else's translation of this and other surreal short
stories by the very talented Etgar Keret. Incidentally, the original
story is written in the plural because in Hebrew we call quantum
mechanics, roughly, "theory of the quantas;" I switched it to singular
here because I think it works better this way in English. I'm not sure
I've done it justice - I'm not sure you can actually do Keret's writing
justice reading it out of the Israeli cultural context (for instance,
many physicists will know Ne'eman for his work on QCD but only Israelis
know he was politically active in a far-right party) - but I thought it
was worth a shot.
